#### Multi-Token Prediction Introduction

| Year | Paper |
|---|---|
| Apr 2024 | [Better & Faster Large Language Models via Multi-token Prediction](https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.19737) |


***

* 10:00

#### Why is MTP useful?
1. Densification of Training Signals
* MTP provides richer and denser training signals than single token prediction. 
* Traditional single token prediction only guides the model to predict a single immediate token.
* MTP, however, instructs the model to simultaneously predict multiple future tokens, generating more informative gradient signals per training example.
2. Improved Data Efficiency
* MTP train models achieved better results on standard benchmarks like HumanEval and MBPP with the same amount of training data, solving about 15% more code problems on average.
* [Mostly Basic Python Problems Dataset (MBPP)](https://github.com/google-research/google-research/blob/master/mbpp/README.md)
* [Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code (Jul 2021)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374)
* [HumanEval](https://github.com/openai/human-eval)
3. Better Planning
* MTP implicitly assigns greater importance to "choice points" - key tokens that significantly influence future outcomes.
* Thus, models learn to prioritize crucial decision-making elements.

4. Higher Inference Speed
* Up to 3x faster inference speed
* [Speed Up LLM Inference with Speculative Decoding](https://medium.com/@genai.works/speed-up-llm-inference-with-speculative-decoding-1fc79701e9d6)

***

* 15:00

***

* 20:00

***

* 25:00

***

* 30:00


tokens uh at a given time. Right? And that's
30:22
why multi-token prediction is often associated with speeding up LLM
30:28
inference and also with self speculative or speculative
30:33
decoding. So as I mentioned speculative decoding involves two models. It
30:39
involves a small language model which quickly predicts the next k tokens in a sequence. Now here is where multi-token
30:44
prediction is used and it also uses a main large language model which verifies the tokens generated by the draft model
30:51
and corrects them as needed. So that's why you'll see the word here self speculative decoding which is used
30:57
during inference. Okay. The reason I'm mentioning all of these terminologies to you and providing a quick intuition is
31:04
because when you hear the term multi-token prediction, you'll often hear the terms densification of training
31:10
signal. then you will hear they're better at planning. Then you will hear the term self speculative decoding. So
31:16
you should have a basic idea of what these terminologies mean. So in summary,
31:22
the four main reasons why multi-toal prediction is useful is that it leads to densification of training signals which
31:28
means that the training just becomes a lot more richer. Um as we saw the key
31:35
thing to note here is that in single token prediction the model only learns immediate immediate next step
31:41
dependencies with multi-token prediction the model sees and learns the relationship across multiple future
31:48
steps simultaneously and uh thus it develops better representations with respect to
31:53
planning and forecasting. That's the first reason which we saw densification of training signals. Second reason is
32:00
improved data efficiency. So this is a quantified result which has been proved
32:05
in this paper where they show that on the MBP and human eval benchmark uh
32:11
multi-token prediction consistently outperforms uh single token prediction.
32:18
The third result or the third reason why multi-token prediction is useful is better planning. And here we saw we saw
32:25
this in a very intuitive manner that multi-token prediction implicitly assigns higher importance to choice
32:31
point. And a choice point is that point which leads to consequential
32:36
uh next tokens. So multi-token prediction loss assigns higher higher implicit weights
32:43
to consequential tokens and it assigns lower implicit weights to inconsequential tokens. That's why it's
32:49
better at planning. And the fourth reason which we saw is it has a higher inference speed up to three times uh
32:56
faster in inference speed. And if you want to implement speculative decoding
33:02
you need two language models, right? You can use a small language model which predicts the next K tokens in a
33:07
sequence. You can use multi-token prediction for this and you can use a larger language model to verify the
33:12
token generated by this small model which is also called as the draft model. Okay. So these are the four main reasons
33:20
why multi-token prediction is actually useful. And now the last thing which I
33:25
want to mention today briefly is that deepseek used multi-token prediction gains only during pre-training. Okay. So
33:34
during inference they did not use speculative decoding. They only used multi-token prediction during
33:39
pre-training because of multiple reasons because they got densification of training signals because of improved
33:45
data efficiency because of improved planning etc. But they did not use the
33:50
higher inference speed of multi-token prediction. In fact during inference they only predicted one single token at
33:56
a time. And this is mentioned in their paper over here. Our MTP strategy multi-token
34:04
prediction strategy only mainly aims to improve the performance of the main model. So during the inference we can
34:10
directly discard the MTP modules and the main model can function independently and normally additionally we can also
34:17
repurpose these MTP modules for speculative decoding. So they have said we can also repurpose this multi-token
34:24
prediction models for speculative decoding. They have not done it but they said that we can do it. But the main
34:29
version three paper used a single token prediction for inference. So during inference they discarded the MTP
34:36
modules. And as they have mentioned at the start an MTP objective densifies the
34:41
training signals. We have already seen what densification of training signal means. And here they also say it may
34:46
improve data efficiency. We have already seen what this this mean. So the reason I have covered this point number one and
34:53
point number two here densification of training signals and improve data efficiency. It's because it's directly
34:59
mentioned in the deepseek paper. Uh here they have also mentioned MTP may enable the model to pre-plan its
35:06
representations for better prediction of future tokens. And we have seen this also here we saw that in the
35:12
densification uh uh the multi-token prediction guides
35:17
internal representations towards better planning. And we also saw that planning is improved in this better planning
35:24
section where we saw that uh the model the multi token prediction implicitly
35:30
assigns greater importance to choice points and thus it's good at decision making into the future. So all of these
35:37
points which have been mentioned in the deepsek first paragraph usually when you read it you feel that you have
35:42
understood it right but beneath it there is a lot of intuition and theory which I wanted to explain in today's lecture
35:50
in in the next lecture on multi-token prediction we'll understand the multi-token prediction modules so
35:57
especially we'll understand the exact mathematics behind how multi-token prediction is implemented by deepseek uh
36:04
so I've written all of this on the white report which we are going to go through sequentially and finally we are going to
36:10
code a multi-token prediction module fully from scratch. All right. So I hope all of you
36:16
found today's lecture useful, informative and intuitive. The main idea behind today's lecture was to give you
36:22
an intuition behind why multi token prediction is used by deepseek and I believe many modern LLMs might start
36:29
using multi token prediction. So I hope you are excited for the next lectures
36:34
which involve MTP or multi-token prediction mathematics and then coding it from scratch. As I'm uh making these
36:41
lectures, it's important that all of you make notes along with me because multi
36:46
multi latent attention and mixture of experts very challenging concepts. Multi-to prediction is not as
36:51
challenging but it's still important that these three fundamental building blocks are very clear in your mind and
36:58
the only way uh these concepts will get stronger and stronger is if you make detailed notes about it. So thanks
37:05
everyone and I look forward to seeing you in the next lecture.

















